docs: kafka connect concepts for overview (#5504)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/overview/con-configuration-points-connect.adoc

A distributed Kafka Connect cluster has a group ID and a set of internal connector topics.
Kafka Connect instances are configured by default with the same:

* Group ID for the Kafka Connect cluster
* Kafka topic to store the connector offsets
* Kafka topic to store connector and task status configurations
* Kafka topic to store connector and task status updates

If multiple different Kafka Connect instances are used, these settings must be unique for the workers of each Kafka Connect cluster created.

.Worker configuration that must be unique for each Kafka Connect instance
[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaConnectApiVersion}
kind: KafkaConnect
# ...
spec:
  config:
    group.id: my-connect-cluster
    offset.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-offsets
    config.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-configs
    status.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-status
----

The group ID identifies the Kafka Connect worker nodes. Kafka Connect clusters cannot share the ID or topics as it will create errors.
The names of the connectors used by each Kafka Connect instance must also be unique.

> You can also deploy connector plugins using the `build` configuration of the `KafkaConnect` resource.

Reviewer: I think a link to more details about build would be useful here.

Connector plugins provide specific configuration for the creation of connector instances.

> After connector plugins have been deployed, you can use Strimzi’s `KafkaConnector` custom resource or the Kafka Connect API to manage connector instances.

Reviewer: This might be better. I would probably not say that the plugins are deployed. Only the connector instances can be deployed.

```suggestion
After connector plugins have been added to the Kafka Connect deployment, you can use Strimzi’s `KafkaConnector` custom resource or the Kafka Connect API to manage connector instances.
```

You can also create new connector instances using these options.

The Cluster Operator manages Kafka Connect clusters deployed using the `KafkaConnect` resource and connectors created using the `KafkaConnector` resource.

[discrete]
== Connector plugin configuration

Connector plugins provide the configuration for connecting to an external data source.

> A set of JAR files or TGZ archives define the implementation required to connect to the data source.

Reviewer: Since we support also ZIPs and Maven in the future, I would either use only JARs (since JARs are what is added at the end) or keep it completely generic.

Author: I made it generic

> Connector plugins are readily available for use with many external systems.

Reviewer: The _readily available_ sounds confusing to me when the plugins have to be added first.

Author: Changed to _Connector plugins for many external systems are available for use with Kafka Connect._

  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-connect-cluster <2>
spec:
  class: org.apache.kafka.connect.file.FileStreamSourceConnector <3>
  tasksMax: 2 <4>
  config: <5>
    file: "/opt/kafka/LICENSE" <6>
    topic: my-topic <7>
    # ...
----
<1> Name of the `KafkaConnector` resource, which is used as the name of the connector. Use any name that is valid for a Kubernetes resource.
<2> Name of the Kafka Connect cluster to create the connector instance in. Connectors must be deployed to the same namespace as the Kafka Connect cluster they link to.
<3> Full name or alias of the connector class. This should be present in the image being used by the Kafka Connect cluster.
<4> Maximum number of Kafka Connect tasks that the connector can create.
<5> link:{BookURLDeploying}#kafkaconnector-configs[Connector configuration^] as key-value pairs.
<6> Location of the connector configuration file. The source connector reads from the `/opt/kafka/LICENSE` file.
<7> Kafka topic to publish the source data to.

NOTE: You can link:{BookURLUsing}#proc-loading-config-with-provider-str[load confidential configuration values for a connector^] from Kubernetes Secrets or ConfigMaps.

[discrete]

> == Kafka Connect API

Reviewer: Could we add some note here that if users want to access the API from outside Kubernetes they should create their own Service / Ingress / Route? That is a common question.

Reviewer 2: We've got that now on line 249 below. But perhaps a small "Exposing the Kafka Connect REST API" procedure would be better (certainly more easily found).

[id="configuration-points-connect_{context}"]
= Kafka Connect configuration

[role="_abstract"]
You can use the `KafkaConnect` custom resource to configure a Kafka Connect instance.
Using this resource, you can configure the worker nodes that comprise a Kafka Connect cluster and build a container image with connector plugin configuration.

> You can also enable KafkaConnectors in your `KafkaConnect` configuration to be able to use the `KafkaConnector` resource to manage connector plugins.

Reviewer 3: To enable KafkaConnectors, use the `strimzi.io/use-connector-resources: "true"` annotation.

Author: @laidan6000 - this is just the abstract of the section. The enabling bit is described in a sub-section. 

Changed to:

> You can also enable KafkaConnectors in your `KafkaConnect` configuration. KafkaConnectors are an alternative to managing connectors using the Kafka Connect REST API.

[discrete]
== Kafka Connect configuration
Use Strimzi’s `KafkaConnect` resource to quickly and easily create new Kafka Connect instances.
When you deploy Kafka Connect using the `KafkaConnect` resource, you specify bootstrap server addresses (`bootstrapServers`) for connecting to the Kafka cluster in its `spec`.

> You can specify more than one address in case a server is down.

Author: Added a note on Kafka cluster:

> NOTE: The Kafka cluster doesn't need to be managed by Strimzi or deployed to the Kubernetes cluster.

You also specify the authentication credentials and TLS encryption certificates to make a secure connection.

You specify the configuration for workers in the `config` of the `KafkaConnect` resource.

.Example worker configuration
[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaConnectApiVersion}
kind: KafkaConnect
# ...

> spec:

Reviewer 3: Do you need another ellipsis between the `spec` and the `config`?

  config:
    group.id: my-connect-cluster <1>
    offset.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-offsets <2>
    config.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-configs <3>
    status.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-status <4>
    Key.converter: org.apache.kafka.connect.json.JsonConverter <5>
    value.converter: org.apache.kafka.connect.json.JsonConverter <6>
    key.converter.schemas.enable: true <7>
    value.converter.schemas.enable: true <8>
    config.storage.replication.factor: 3 <9>
    offset.storage.replication.factor: 3 <10>
    status.storage.replication.factor: 3 <11>
  # ...
----

> <1> Kafka Connect cluster group that the instance belongs to.

Author: Kafka says: _A unique string that identifies the Connect cluster group this worker belongs to._

<2> Kafka topic that stores connector offsets.
<3> Kafka topic that stores connector and task status configurations.
<4> Kafka topic that stores connector and task status updates.
<5> Converter to transform message keys into JSON format for storage in Kafka.
<6> Converter to transform message values into JSON format for storage in Kafka.
<7> Schema enabled for converting message keys into structured JSON format.

> <8> Schema enabled for converting message values into structured JSON format.

Author: The Overview has two new sections. _Kafka Connect concepts_ describes each of the components (workers, transforms, schemas etc). This section _Kafka Connect configuration_ describes some of the key config -- though it's only meant as an overview.

<9> Replication factor for the Kafka topic that stores connector offsets.
<10> Replication factor for the Kafka topic that stores connector and task status configurations.
<11> Replication factor for the Kafka topic that stores connector and task status updates.

NOTE: In this example, JSON converters are specified. The converters you specify must be in a data format supported by Kafka.

A distributed Kafka Connect cluster has a group ID and a set of internal connector topics.
Kafka Connect instances are configured by default with the same:

* Group ID for the Kafka Connect cluster
* Kafka topic to store the connector offsets
* Kafka topic to store connector and task status configurations
* Kafka topic to store connector and task status updates

> If multiple different Kafka Connect instances are used, these settings must be unique for the workers of each Kafka Connect cluster created.

Author: I've moved this above the `KafkaConnect` config.

.Worker configuration that must be unique for each Kafka Connect instance
[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaConnectApiVersion}
kind: KafkaConnect
# ...
spec:
  config:
    group.id: my-connect-cluster
    offset.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-offsets
    config.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-configs
    status.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-status
----

The group ID identifies the Kafka Connect worker nodes. Kafka Connect clusters cannot share the ID or topics as it will create errors.

> The names of the connectors used by each Kafka Connect instance must also be unique.

Author: I've removed the _The group ID identifies the Kafka Connect worker nodes_ as we describe the group ID and topics in the following callout. So we now have:

```
A distributed Kafka Connect cluster has a group ID and a set of internal connector topics:

* `group.id`
* `offset.storage.topic`
* `config.storage.topic`
* `status.storage.topic`

Kafka Connect clusters are configured by default with the same values for these properties.
Kafka Connect clusters cannot share the group ID or topic names as it will create errors.
If multiple different Kafka Connect clusters are used, these settings must be unique for the workers of each Kafka Connect cluster created.

The names of the connectors used by each Kafka Connect instance must also be unique.
```

You can also link:{BookURLDeploying}#creating-new-image-using-kafka-connect-build-str[deploy connector plugins^] using the `build` configuration of the `KafkaConnect` resource.

> Connector plugins provide specific configuration for the creation of connector instances.

Author: Changed to:

> Connector plugins provide the implementation to create connector instances. 
> When a plugin is instantiated, configuration is provided for connection to an external data system.

> After connector plugins have been added to the Kafka Connect deployment, you can use Strimzi’s `KafkaConnector` custom resource or the Kafka Connect API to manage connector instances.

Reviewer 2: Plugins are added to the container image used for the pods (workers) in  a deployment.

You can also create new connector instances using these options.

The Cluster Operator manages Kafka Connect clusters deployed using the `KafkaConnect` resource and connectors created using the `KafkaConnector` resource.

[discrete]
== Connector plugin configuration

> Connector plugins provide the configuration for connecting to an external data source.

Reviewer 2: Again, I find the word "configuration" here confusing. I don't think of a (set of) jar file(s) (which is what a plugin _is_) as "configuration". I think most people think of configuration as either some kind of text file or similar with a bunch of settings, or a UI with a bunch of settings. 

I would prefer if we use the word "configuration" to refer to the `config` part of the resources concerned, and the word "resource" for the CRs and avoid conflating either with "plugin".

Author: Changed to:

> Connector plugins provide the implementation for connecting to specific types of external data system.
> Plugins contain a set of files that define the implementation.

> Plugins contain a set of files that define the implementation required to connect to the data source.

Reviewer 2: Firstly, let's not forget that SMTs, Predicate etc are also plugins. Thus a plugin _might_ contain a connector (or possibly several) , but doesn't _have_ to.
Also, I see no harm in being explicit that they're _jar_ files. 
Also, it's better to talk about _a_ data source/sink, rather than _the_, because it's only when the connector is instantiated that  the source/sink is defined (usually in terms of some connection config parameters).

```suggestion
Connector plugins are a set of one or more jar files that define a connector and task implementation for connecting to a given kind of data source.
```

Connector plugins for many external systems are available for use with Kafka Connect.
You can also create your own connector plugins.

> Connector plugins provide the configuration as a set of files that define the implementation required to connect to specific types of external data system.

Reviewer 3: I don't actually think this sentence (line 100) is necessary. The earlier sentences explain the concepts well.

The configuration describes the source input data and target output data to feed into and out of Kafka Connect.
The external source data must reference specific topics that will store the messages.
The plugins might also contain the libraries and files needed to transform the data.

A Kafka Connect deployment can have one or more plugins, but only one version of each plugin.

> You can create a custom Kafka Connect image that uses new connector plugins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can create a custom Kafka Connect image that includes your choice of connector plugins.
```

You can create the image in two ways:

* link:{BookURLDeploying}#creating-new-image-using-kafka-connect-build-str[Automatically using Kafka Connect configuration^]
* link:{BookURLDeploying}#creating-new-image-from-base-str[Manually using Dockerfile and a Kafka container image from {DockerRepository} as a base image^]

> To create the container image automatically, you specify and deploy plugins with your Kafka Connect cluster using the `KafkaConnect` resource.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To create the container image automatically, you specify and deploy plugins for your Kafka Connect cluster using the `KafkaConnect` resource.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create the container image automatically, you specify and deploy plugins for your Kafka Connect cluster using the `build` section of a `KafkaConnect` resource.
```

Strimzi automatically downloads and adds the plugin artifacts to a new container image.
The plugins are used by the workers that orchestrate the streaming processes.

> Build (`build`) configuration automatically builds a container image with connector plugins.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Build (`build`) configuration in the `KafkaConnect` resource automatically builds a container image with connector plugins.
```

Reviewer 2: If you accept by suggestion above this sentence won't be needed.

Author: removed the sentence

If you are using a Dockerfile to build an image, you can use Strimzi’s latest container image as a base image to add your plugin configuration file.

.Example showing manual addition of connector plugin configuration
[source,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
FROM {DockerKafkaConnect}
USER root:root
COPY ./_my-plugins_/ /opt/kafka/plugins/
USER {DockerImageUser}
----

[discrete]
== `KafkaConnector` management of connectors

The `KafkaConnector` resource offers a Kubernetes-native approach to management of connectors by the Cluster Operator.
To manage connectors with `KafkaConnector` resources, you must specify an annotation in your `KafkaConnect` custom resource.

.Annotation to enable KafkaConnectors
[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaConnectApiVersion}
kind: KafkaConnect
metadata:
  name: my-connect-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/use-connector-resources: "true"
  # ...
----

> Setting `use-connector-resources` to `true`  enables KafkaConnectors to create, delete and reconfigure connectors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Setting `use-connector-resources` to `true`  enables KafkaConnectors to create, delete, and reconfigure connectors.
```

> If enabled in your `KafkaConnect` configuration, you must use the `KafkaConnector` resource to define connectors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If enabled in your `KafkaConnect` configuration, you must use the `KafkaConnector` resource to define and manage connectors.
```

`KafkaConnector` resources are configured to connect to external systems.
They are deployed to the same Kubernetes cluster as the Kafka Connect cluster and Kafka cluster interacting with the external data system.

.Kafka components are contained in the same Kubernetes cluster

> image:overview/kafka-concepts-kafka-connector.png[Kafka and Kafka Connect contained in the same cluster]

Author: I've added _Kubernetes_ to the image (trying to avoid upstream/downstream versions) and changed the alt image text to _Kafka and Kafka Connect clusters_

![kafka-concepts-kafka-connector](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/47596553/132486422-d35870f2-49c3-41d0-85c8-f61625589f13.png)

> image:overview/kafka-concepts-kafka-connector.png[Kafka and Kafka Connect contained in the same cluster]

Reviewer: Should the custom resource be inside the Kubernetes box? It is really something what is inside Kubernetes.

> image:overview/kafka-concepts-kafka-connector.png[Kafka and Kafka Connect contained in the same cluster]

Author: We can do that. I've changed to;

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/47596553/132690698-83ddf782-2456-4ce9-b0a2-d69785e8ef8d.png)

The configuration specifies how connector instances connect to an external system, including any authentication.

> You also need to say what data to watch within the data source.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You also need to state what data to watch within the data source.
```

Reviewer 2: I think we need to be really careful with language in this PR. We're talking a lot about "data source" and I think that easily leads to people thinking only about source connectors. I think you often mean "data source/sink", or are maing the assumption that all connectors a source connectors.

Author: @tombentley Good point Tom. I've gone through the references to _data source_. I think we're clear now. For this section, I made it about a specific _source connector_ example.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/47596553/132479659-e09e594b-89e4-4016-9005-8b928bea4bb3.png)

For example, you might provide a database name in the configuration.
You can also specify where the data should sit in Kafka by specifying a target topic name.

.Example KafkaConnector configuration
[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaConnectApiVersion}
kind: KafkaConnector
metadata:
  name: my-source-connector  <1>
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-connect-cluster <2>
spec:
  class: org.apache.kafka.connect.file.FileStreamSourceConnector <3>
  tasksMax: 2 <4>
  config: <5>
    file: "/opt/kafka/LICENSE" <6>
    topic: my-topic <7>
    # ...
----
<1> Name of the `KafkaConnector` resource, which is used as the name of the connector. Use any name that is valid for a Kubernetes resource.
<2> Name of the Kafka Connect cluster to create the connector instance in. Connectors must be deployed to the same namespace as the Kafka Connect cluster they link to.

> <3> Full name or alias of the connector class. This should be present in the image being used by the Kafka Connect cluster.

Reviewer 2: Have we defined "alias"?

Author: Changed to:

> Full name of the connector class. This should be present in the image being used by the Kafka Connect cluster. You can use an alias if one is defined.

<4> Maximum number of Kafka Connect tasks that the connector can create.
<5> link:{BookURLDeploying}#kafkaconnector-configs[Connector configuration^] as key-value pairs.

> <6> Location of the connector configuration file. The source connector reads from the `/opt/kafka/LICENSE` file.

Reviewer 2: Make is a bit clearer that this configuration is specific to the connector class.

```suggestion
<6> In this example we're configuring the FileStreamSourceConnector to read from the `/opt/kafka/LICENSE` file.
```

<7> Kafka topic to publish the source data to.

NOTE: You can link:{BookURLUsing}#proc-loading-config-with-provider-str[load confidential configuration values for a connector^] from Kubernetes Secrets or ConfigMaps.

[discrete]
== Kafka Connect API

> Use the Kafka Connect REST API as an alternative to using the `KafkaConnector` custom resources to manage connectors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the Kafka Connect REST API as an alternative to using `KafkaConnector` resources to manage connectors.
```

The Kafka Connect REST API is available as a service running on `_CONNECT-CLUSTER-NAME_-connect-api:8083`, where _CONNECT-CLUSTER-NAME_ is the name of your Kafka Connect cluster.

You add the connector configuration as a JSON object.

> .Example REST API curl request to add connector configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Example curl request to add connector configuration
```

[source,curl,subs=attributes+]
----
curl -X POST \
  http://my-connect-cluster-connect-api:8083/connectors \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{ "name": "my-source-connector",
    "config":
    {
      "class":"org.apache.kafka.connect.file.FileStreamSourceConnector",
      "file": "/opt/kafka/LICENSE",
      "topic":"my-topic",
      "tasksMax": "4",
      # ...
    }
}

> '

Reviewer 3: I think the ` can move up a line.

.Worker configuration that must be unique for each Kafka Connect cluster
[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaConnectApiVersion}
kind: KafkaConnect
# ...
spec:
  config:
    group.id: my-connect-cluster
    offset.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-offsets
    config.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-configs
    status.storage.topic: my-connect-cluster-status
----

You can also link:{BookURLDeploying}#creating-new-image-using-kafka-connect-build-str[deploy connector plugins^] using the `build` configuration of the `KafkaConnect` resource.
Connector plugins provide the implementation to create connector instances.
When a plugin is instantiated, configuration is provided for connection to an external data system.

After connector plugins have been added to the container image used for the worker pods in a deployment,
you can use Strimzi’s `KafkaConnector` custom resource or the Kafka Connect API to manage connector instances.
You can also create new connector instances using these options.

The Cluster Operator manages Kafka Connect clusters deployed using the `KafkaConnect` resource and connectors created using the `KafkaConnector` resource.

[discrete]

> == Connector plugin configuration

Author: I changed the order of this section and updated the intro

    Key.converter: org.apache.kafka.connect.json.JsonConverter <5>
    value.converter: org.apache.kafka.connect.json.JsonConverter <6>
    key.converter.schemas.enable: true <7>
    value.converter.schemas.enable: true <8>
    config.storage.replication.factor: 3 <9>
    offset.storage.replication.factor: 3 <10>
    status.storage.replication.factor: 3 <11>
  # ...
----
<1> The Kafka Connect cluster ID within Kafka.
<2> Kafka topic that stores connector offsets.
<3> Kafka topic that stores connector and task status configurations.
<4> Kafka topic that stores connector and task status updates.
<5> Converter to transform message keys into JSON format for storage in Kafka.
<6> Converter to transform message values into JSON format for storage in Kafka.
<7> Schema enabled for converting message keys into structured JSON format.
<8> Schema enabled for converting message values into structured JSON format.
<9> Replication factor for the Kafka topic that stores connector offsets.
<10> Replication factor for the Kafka topic that stores connector and task status configurations.
<11> Replication factor for the Kafka topic that stores connector and task status updates.

> NOTE: In this example, JSON converters are specified. The converters you specify must be in a data format supported by Kafka.

Author: Removed

> .Worker configuration that must be unique for each Kafka Connect cluster

Author: we mention these properties must be unique before the main example and list them too.  
So I've removed this example and added _Must be unique for each Kafka Connect cluster_ to the properties in the main example.

[discrete]
== Kafka Connect API

Use the Kafka Connect REST API as an alternative to using `KafkaConnector` resources to manage connectors.
The Kafka Connect REST API is available as a service running on `_<connect-cluster-name>_-connect-api:8083`, where _<connect-cluster-name>_ is the name of your Kafka Connect cluster.

You add the connector configuration as a JSON object.

.Example curl request to add connector configuration
[source,curl,subs=attributes+]
----
curl -X POST \
  http://my-connect-cluster-connect-api:8083/connectors \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{ "name": "my-source-connector",
    "config":
    {
      "class":"org.apache.kafka.connect.file.FileStreamSourceConnector",
      "file": "/opt/kafka/LICENSE",
      "topic":"my-topic",
      "tasksMax": "4",
      # ...
    }
}'
----

If KafkaConnectors are enabled, manual changes made directly using the Kafka Connect REST API are reverted by the Cluster Operator.

The operations supported by the REST API are described in the http://kafka.apache.org[Apache Kafka documentation^].

NOTE: You can expose the Kafka Connect API service outside Kubernetes.

> You do this by creating a service that uses a connection mechanism that provides the access, such as an ingress or route.

Reviewer: We should add warning about this being insecure.
